Rewrite the chapter on subtyping and variance (#340)
rust-lang/nomicon: src/subtyping.md

# Subtyping and Variance

Rust uses lifetimes to track the relationships between borrows and ownership.
However, a naive implementation of lifetimes would be either too restrictive,
or permit undefined behaviour.

In order to allow flexible usage of lifetimes
while also preventing their misuse, Rust uses a combination of **Subtyping** and **Variance**.

## Subtyping

> Subtyping is the idea that one type can be a *subtype* of another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subtyping is the idea that one type can be used in place of another.
```

I'm not happy with the current line, because a reader probably doesn't know what a subtype is either.

Let's define that `Sub` is a subtype of `Super` (we'll be using the notation `Sub: Super` throughout this chapter)

What this is suggesting to us is that the set of *requirements* that `Super` defines
are completely satisfied by `Sub`. `Sub` may then have more requirements.

An example of simple subtyping that exists in the language are [supertraits](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/book/ch19-03-advanced-traits.html?highlight=supertraits#using-supertraits-to-require-one-traits-functionality-within-another-trait)

```rust
use std::fmt;

trait OutlinePrint: fmt::Display {
    fn outline_print(&self) {
        todo!()
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: I think the [`Error`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/error/trait.Error.html) trait probably fits better here.

- It already exists in the standard library.
- It's a trait users will have used (or at least seen), and maybe even implemented.

When I see people asking about "traits requiring other traits" it is usually the example I reach for, because it's very obvious - In order to use something as an error, it must be displayable..

Here, we have that `OutlinePrint: fmt::Display` (`OutlinePrint` is a *subtype* of `Display`),
because it has all the requirements of `fmt::Display`, plus the `outline_print` function.

However, subtyping in traits is not that interesting in the case of Rust.
Here in the nomicon, we're going to focus more with how subtyping interacts with **lifetimes**

> Take this example

Reviewer: Personally I would lead the chapter with an example, *before even mentioning variance and subtyping*, showing an example that should compile but doesn't, where the user can see that it makes sense, and then drop *we can fix this with variance*

```rust,ignore
fn debug<T: std::fmt::Debug>(a: T, b: T) {

>     println!("a = {:?} b = {:?}", a, b);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    println!("a = {a:?} b = {b:?}");
```
This raises the MSRV of the nomicon examples, but I think we can take that :). Same for the other examples.

of all the Animals). Equivalently, we say that Animal is a *supertype* of Cat.
With subtypes, we can tweak our overly strict static type system
with a simple rule: anywhere a value of type `T` is expected, we will also
accept values that are subtypes of `T`.
`'a` may define a region larger than `'b`, but that still fits our definition.
Going back to our example above, we can say that `'static: 'b`.

Or more concretely: anywhere an Animal is expected, a Cat or Dog will also work.
For now, let's accept the idea that subtypes of lifetimes can be passed through references (more on this in [Variance](#variance)),
eg. `&'static str` is a subtype of `&'b str`, then we can let them coerce, and then the example above will compile

As we will see throughout the rest of this section, subtyping is a lot more complicated
and subtle than this, but this simple rule is a very good 99% intuition. And unless you
write unsafe code, the compiler will automatically handle all the corner cases for you.
```rust
fn debug<T: std::fmt::Debug>(a: T, b: T) {
    println!("a = {:?} b = {:?}", a, b);
}

But this is the Rustonomicon. We're writing unsafe code, so we need to understand how

> this stuff really works, and how we can mess it up.

Reviewer: I actually really liked this section, can we keep it? I think it's important to say this stuff is important when writing unsafe. And maybe include an example of messing it up?

Author: Absolutely. It must have slipped past me while I was cleaning it up

# Subtyping and Variance

Rust uses lifetimes to track the relationships between borrows and ownership.
However, a naive implementation of lifetimes would be either too restrictive,
or permit undefined behaviour.

In order to allow flexible usage of lifetimes
while also preventing their misuse, Rust uses a combination of **Subtyping** and **Variance**.

> Let's start with a example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's start with an example.
```

```rust,ignore
fn debug<T: std::fmt::Debug>(a: T, b: T) {
    println!("a = {:?} b = {:?}", a, b);
}

fn main() {
    let hello: &'static str = "hello";
    {
        let world = String::from("world");
        let world = &world; // 'b has a shorter lifetime than 'static
        debug(hello, world);
    }
}
```

> In a conservative implementation of lifetimes, since `a` and `b` have differeing lifetimes,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a conservative implementation of lifetimes, since `a` and `b` have differing lifetimes,
```

we might see the following error:

```text
error[E0308]: mismatched types
 --> src/main.rs:10:16
   |
10 |         debug(hello, world);
   |                      ^
   |                      |
   |                      expected `&'static str`, found struct `&'b str`
```

This would be rather unfortunate. In this case,
what we want is to accept any type that lives *at least as long* as `'b`.

> Let's try using subtyping with our lifetimes.

Author: Hmm. This is contradictory to how the original page represents `&'a T` as a type constructor with type arguments `'a` and `T`

> Let's try using subtyping with our lifetimes.

Reviewer 4: > Nit: subtyping applies to types, not lifetimes

I'm not sure that's really a nitpick. I think it's potentially the crux of why this chapter explaining lifetime variance has been quite unintuitive (at least for me) - since it tries too hard to compare lifetime variance to subtyping which is a different thing.

I've tried to expand on this here: https://github.com/rust-lang/nomicon/issues/339#issuecomment-1422694052 as well as link back to other issues that discussed how rust should define variance for lifetimes.

## Subtyping

Subtyping is the idea that one type can be used in place of another.

> Let's define that `Sub` is a subtype of `Super` (we'll be using the notation `Sub: Super` throughout this chapter)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Let's define that `Sub` is a subtype of `Super` (we'll be using the notation `Sub: Super` throughout this chapter).
```

> Let's define that `Sub` is a subtype of `Super` (we'll be using the notation `Sub: Super` throughout this chapter)

Author: Aren't these two the same thing? `'a` outlives `'b` means that `'a` is a subtype of `'b`

> Let's define that `Sub` is a subtype of `Super` (we'll be using the notation `Sub: Super` throughout this chapter)

Reviewer 3: I don't think outlives is a subtype relation because lifetimes are not types, it could be called sub-lifetimes, but we don't call it that.

> Let's define that `Sub` is a subtype of `Super` (we'll be using the notation `Sub: Super` throughout this chapter)

Reviewer 6: > Aren't these two the same thing? `'a` outlives `'b` means that `'a` is a subtype of `'b`

That's actually the opposite of what's true: `'a: 'b` means `'a <: 'b`

> What this is suggesting to us is that the set of *requirements* that `Super` defines

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if requirements is the best word here. Perhaps it is better to use terminology like "A value which has type Sub can be used in any way that a value of type Super can, and possibly more"

are completely satisfied by `Sub`. `Sub` may then have more requirements.

> An example of simple subtyping that exists in the language are [supertraits](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/book/ch19-03-advanced-traits.html?highlight=supertraits#using-supertraits-to-require-one-traits-functionality-within-another-trait)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
An example of simple subtyping that exists in the language is [supertraits](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch19-03-advanced-traits.html#using-supertraits-to-require-one-traits-functionality-within-another-trait):
```
It might also be useful to put the URL at the end using an anchor, as in `send-and-sync.md`.

```rust
use std::fmt;

pub trait Error: fmt::Display {
    fn source(&self) -> Option<&(dyn Error + 'static)>;
    fn description(&self) -> &str;
    fn cause(&self) -> Option<&dyn Error>;
}
```

Here, we have that `Error: fmt::Display` (`Error` is a *subtype* of `Display`),
because it has all the requirements of `fmt::Display`, plus the `source`/`description`/`cause` functions.

However, subtyping in traits is not that interesting.
Here in the nomicon, we're going to focus more with how subtyping interacts with lifetimes

Let's define a lifetime to be the simple requirement:

> `'a` defines a region of code in which a value will be alive.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`'a` defines a region of code.
```

When part of a borrow, it thus represents a region of code within which a value is borrowed. A fortiori, the region within which that borrowee is alive needs to be at least as big as the region of the borrow.

In other words, _lifetime_ is a misnomer; while it could have made sense back in the day with lexical lifetimes (and even then it would have been a stretch), now with NLL it doesn't really match either the life-time of the borrowee, nor that of the borrower:

```rs
/* 0 */ {
/* 1 */     let mut x = 42;
/* 2 */     {
/* 3 */         let r = &x;
/* 4 */         println!("{}", *r);
/* 5 */         x = 0;
/* 6 */         println!("{}", x);
/* 7 */     }
/* 8 */     println!("{}", x);
/* 9 */ }
```

  - The _alive_-time of `x` is `1.. 9`
  - The _alive_-time of `r` is `3.. 7`
  - The _lifetime_ / span of the borrow of the `&x` borrow (held by `r`) is `3.. 5`

Before NLL, the second and third spans had to match; they don't since.

Now that we have a defined set of requirements for lifetimes, we can define how they relate to each other.

> `'long: 'short` if and only if `'long` defines a region of code that **completely contains** `'short`.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`'long : 'short` if and only if `'long` defines a region of code that **completely contains** `'short` (_i.e._, `'long ⊇ 'short`)
```

I've added the whitespace to `'a : 'b` kind of bounds, since we're not really within rustfmt-ed code anymore, we're teaching stuff, and `:` for lifetimes represents an (antisymmetrical) binary "boolean" operator, so there is no reason to favor the left hand side over the right hand side.

> `'long` may define a region larger than `'short`, but that still fits our definition.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`'long` may define a region larger than `'short`, but that still fits our definition.

### Some basic properties

For any lifetimes `'a`, `'b`, and `'c`:

  - `'a : 'a` (a region fits inside itself / `'a = 'a ⇒ 'a ⊇ 'a`);

  - if `'a : 'b` and `'b : 'a`, then `'a = 'b` (the only way for two regions to be inside one another is if they're equal / `('a ⊇ 'b & 'b ⊇ 'a) ⇒ 'a = 'b`);

  - if `'a : 'b`, and `'b : 'c`, then `'a : 'c` (if `'b` is part of `'a`, and `'c` is part of `'b`, then necessarily `'c` is part of `'a` / `('a ⊇ 'b & 'b ⊇ 'c) ⇒ 'c ⊇ 'a`.

  - `'static` stands for `'forever`, the never-ending / infinite region. Thus `'static ⊇ 'a` for any `'a`; that is:
      `'static : 'a`.
```

This serves both as concrete pedagogical examples, and genuine tools to be used later on 🙂

> As we will see throughout the rest of this chapter,
subtyping is a lot more complicated and subtle than this,
but this simple rule is a very good 99% intuition.

> And unless you write unsafe code, the compiler will automatically handle all the corner cases for you.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
And unless you write unsafe code, the compiler will automatically handle all the corner cases for you.

  - Note that the aforementioned properties (`:` between lifetimes defines a partial order with `'static` being the maximum) remain true even the "region" representation falls apart.
```

> But this is the Rustonomicon. We're writing unsafe code,
so we need to understand how this stuff really works, and how we can mess it up.

> Going back to our example above, we can say that `'static: 'b`.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Going back to our example above, we can say that `'static : 'b`, as mentioned just above.
```

or, if my previous suggestions were not to be added:

```suggestion
Going back to our example above, we can say that `'static: 'b`. Indeed `'static` stands for `'forever`: the never-ending / infinite region. Since any other region is then thus contained within it (`'static ⊇ 'b`), we have `'static : 'b` for any lifetime `'b`.
```

> For now, let's also accept the idea that subtypes of lifetimes can be passed through references
> (more on this in [Variance](#variance)),

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
For now, let's also accept the idea that subtypes of lifetimes can be passed through references
_i.e._, "the lifetime of borrow is allowed to shrink" (more on this in [Variance](#variance)),
```

> eg. `&'static str` is a subtype of `&'b str`, then we can let them coerce,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
e.g. `&'static str` is a subtype of `&'b str`, then we can let them coerce,
```

> eg. `&'static str` is a subtype of `&'b str`, then we can let them coerce,

Reviewer 7: _coerce_ is not really a great word, here, since it does have a specific meaning in Rust which subtyping is distinct from.

 -  Maybe something along the lines of?

    ```suggestion
    _e.g._, `&'static str` is a subtype of `&'b str`, then we can let a `&'static str` "become" a `&'b str`.
    ```

    🤷

Reviewer 8: "degrade"  (like atoms) might be a more descriptive work, or "reduce".

and then the example above will compile

```rust
fn debug<T: std::fmt::Debug>(a: T, b: T) {
    println!("a = {:?} b = {:?}", a, b);
}

fn main() {
    let hello: &'static str = "hello";
    {
        let world = String::from("world");
        let world = &world; // 'b has a shorter lifetime than 'static
        debug(hello, world); // a silently converts from `&'static str` into `&'b str`
    }
}
```

## Variance

> Above, we glossed over the fact that `'static: 'b` implied that `&'static T: &'b T`. This uses a property known as variance.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Above, we glossed over the fact that `'static : 'b` implied that `&'static T <: &'b T`. This uses a property known as _variance_.
```

> It's not always as simple as this example though, to understand that let's try extend this example a bit

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
It's not always as simple as this example, though. To understand that, let's try to extend this example a bit:
```

```rust,ignore
fn assign<T>(input: &mut T, val: T) {
    *input = val;
}

fn main() {
    let mut hello: &'static str = "hello";
    {
        let world = String::from("world");
        assign(&mut hello, &world);
    }
    println!("{}", hello); // use after free 😿
}
```

In `assign`, we are setting the `hello` reference to point to `world`.
But then `world` goes out of scope, before the later use of `hello` in the println!

This is a classic use-after-free bug!

Our first instinct might be to blame the `assign` impl, but there's really nothing wrong here.
It shouldn't be surprising that we might want to assign a `T` into a `T`.

The problem is that we cannot assume that `&mut &'static str` and `&mut &'b str` are compatible.

> This must mean that `&mut &'static str` should **not** be a *subtype* of `&mut &'b str`,

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This means that `&mut &'static str`**cannot** be a *subtype* of `&mut &'b str`,
```

even if `'static` is a subtype of `'b`.

> Variance is the way that Rust defines the relationships of subtypes through their *type constructor*.

Reviewer 3: Variance is not just a Rust concept

> Variance is the way that Rust defines the relationships of subtypes through their *type constructor*.

Reviewer 7: Could we avoid type constructors and talk of _generic types_ instead? It ought to be clearer. Moreover, it incidentally allows to add the sentence: talking of the variance of a non-generic type makes no sense.

  - We're glossing over `fn(&str) <: fn(&'concrete str)` here, by the way, but I think that's fine

or permit undefined behaviour.

In order to allow flexible usage of lifetimes
while also preventing their misuse, Rust uses **subtyping** and **variance**.

Let's start with an example.

```rust,ignore
fn debug<'a>(a: &'a str, b: &'a str) {
    println!("a = {:?} b = {:?}", a, b);
}

fn main() {
    let hello: &'static str = "hello";
    {
        let world = String::from("world");
        let world = &world; // 'world has a shorter lifetime than 'static
        debug(hello, world);
    }
}
```

In a conservative implementation of lifetimes, since `hello` and `world` have differing lifetimes,
we might see the following error:

```text
error[E0308]: mismatched types
 --> src/main.rs:10:16
   |
10 |         debug(hello, world);
   |                      ^
   |                      |
   |                      expected `&'static str`, found struct `&'world str`
```

This would be rather unfortunate. In this case,
what we want is to accept any type that lives *at least as long* as `'world`.
Let's try using subtyping with our lifetimes.

## Subtyping

Subtyping is the idea that one type can be used in place of another.

> Let's define that `Sub` is a subtype of `Super` (we'll be using the notation `Sub: Super` throughout this chapter).

Reviewer 6: Just to make sure this doesn't get lost: I don't think we should use this notation. `Sub <: Super` is correct. `Sub: Super` is too confusing with outlives relationship, and generally the opposite of what is (potentially) expected.

Author: Yeah these syntax suggestions are growing on me. I think i agree with them now and I will perform the changes

Reviewer: Why not use existing symbols like `⊂` for this, rather than inventing our own?

Reviewer 6: `<:` is well-used to indicate subtyping and is easy to type.

Reviewer 7: I think that `<:` seems to be too widespread/common in this scenario not to use it. That being said, when generic types are involved, things start to be quite noise, angle-bracket-wise:

```console
Result<Vec<&'static str>> <: Result<Vec<&'_ str>>
```

So `⊂:`, besides being a nicer smiling face 😄, could be a decent middle-ground with @mejrs's proposal:

```console
Result<Vec<&'static str>> ⊂: Result<Vec<&'_ str>>
```

But, it would have the sad side-effect that it wouldn't be that nice in conjunction with `⊇` for regions, and I _really_ find `⊇` for regions to be an incredibly useful notation:

```rust
for<'lt>
      // 'static ⊇ 'lt, and thus:
    &'static str ⊂ &'lt str
,
```

So, if we were not to use `<:`, I'd rather we use a notation with _motion_ to represent subtyping:

```rust
for<'lt>
      // 'static ⊇ 'lt, and thus:
    &'static str → &'lt str
,
Result<Vec<&'static str>> → Result<Vec<&'_ str>>
```

Something like this is, imho, the most readable notation for people unacquainted with type theory (which, let's not forget it, is the target audience for this kind of chapters).

are completely satisfied by `Sub`. `Sub` may then have more requirements.

Now, in order to use subtyping with lifetimes, we need to define the requirement of a lifetime:

> `'a` defines a region of code.

Now that we have a defined set of requirements for lifetimes, we can define how they relate to each other:

> `'long <: 'short` if and only if `'long` defines a region of code that **completely contains** `'short`.

`'long` may define a region larger than `'short`, but that still fits our definition.

> As we will see throughout the rest of this chapter,
subtyping is a lot more complicated and subtle than this,
but this simple rule is a very good 99% intuition.
And unless you write unsafe code, the compiler will automatically handle all the corner cases for you.

> But this is the Rustonomicon. We're writing unsafe code,
so we need to understand how this stuff really works, and how we can mess it up.

Going back to our example above, we can say that `'static <: 'world`.
For now, let's also accept the idea that subtypes of lifetimes can be passed through references
(more on this in [Variance](#variance)),

> _e.g._ `&'static str` is a subtype of `&'world str`, then we can let a `&'static str` "downgrade" into a `&'world str`.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
_e.g._ `&'static str` is a subtype of `&'world str`, then we can "downgrade" `&'static str` into a `&'world str`.
```

With that, the example above will compile:

```rust

> fn debug<T: std::fmt::Debug>(a: T, b: T) {

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
fn debug<'a>(a: &'a str, b: &'a str) {
```
to stay consistent with the original example

therefore we can say that `&mut T` is *invariant* over `T`

Here is a table of some other type constructors and their variances:

|   |                 |     'a    |         T         |     U     |
|---|-----------------|:---------:|:-----------------:|:---------:|
|   | `&'a T `        | covariant | covariant         |           |
|   | `&'a mut T`     | covariant | invariant         |           |
|   | `Box<T>`        |           | covariant         |           |
|   | `Vec<T>`        |           | covariant         |           |
|   | `UnsafeCell<T>` |           | invariant         |           |
|   | `Cell<T>`       |           | invariant         |           |
|   | `fn(T) -> U`    |           | **contra**variant | covariant |
|   | `*const T`      |           | covariant         |           |
|   | `*mut T`        |           | invariant         |           |

Some of these can be explained simply in relation to the others:

* `Vec<T>` and all other owning pointers and collections follow the same logic as `Box<T>`
* `Cell<T>` and all other interior mutability types follow the same logic as `UnsafeCell<T>`

> * `UnsafeCell<T>` having interior mutability gives it the same variance properties as `&mut T`

Author: Can you think of a good way to explain that?

The original mostly just says that since `UnsafeCell<T>` allows you to treat a `&T` as a `&mut T`, it should have the same invariance

subtyping of its outputs. There are three kinds of variance in Rust. Given two
types `Sub` and `Super`, where `Sub` is a subtype of `Super`:

* F is **covariant** if `F<Sub>` is a subtype of `F<Super>` (the subtype property is passed through)
* F is **contravariant** if `F<Super>` is a subtype of `F<Sub>` (the subtype property is "inverted")
* F is **invariant** otherwise (no subtyping relationship exists)

> If we remember from the above examples,

Reviewer 7: FWIW, I agree with @conradludgate's point about the advantage of using `:` everywhere; it allows to use this "subtyping is passed through" / "subtyping is inverted" wave-handed but very useful mnemonic.

I may also be useful to draw a tangential (footnote?) parallel with function monotonicity in mathematics, since for those that know that notion they can suddenly realize they know what all this is all about 🙂

* F is **invariant** otherwise (no subtyping relationship exists)

If we remember from the above examples,
it was ok for us to treat `&'a T` as a subtype of `&'b T` if `'a: 'b`,
therefore we can say that `&'a T` is *covariant* over `'a`.

Also, we saw that it was not ok for us to treat `&mut &'a T` as a subtype of `&mut &'b T`,
therefore we can say that `&mut T` is *invariant* over `T`

Here is a table of some other type constructors and their variances:

|   |                 |     'a    |         T         |     U     |
|---|-----------------|:---------:|:-----------------:|:---------:|
|   | `&'a T `        | covariant | covariant         |           |
|   | `&'a mut T`     | covariant | invariant         |           |
|   | `Box<T>`        |           | covariant         |           |
|   | `Vec<T>`        |           | covariant         |           |
|   | `UnsafeCell<T>` |           | invariant         |           |
|   | `Cell<T>`       |           | invariant         |           |
|   | `fn(T) -> U`    |           | **contra**variant | covariant |
|   | `*const T`      |           | covariant         |           |

> |   | `*mut T`        |           | invariant         |           |

Reviewer 9: don't need the first row anymore as you're removing the `*`

> take references with specific lifetimes (as opposed to the usual "any lifetime",

> > which gets into higher rank lifetimes, which work independently of subtyping).

Reviewer 9: that's just wrong, higher rank lifetimes don't work independently of subtyping.

you don't have to fix that here as it's an existing issue

What's important about this function is that it creates a type equality constraint. It
clearly says in its signature the referent and the value must be the *exact same* type.

Meanwhile, in the caller we pass in `&mut &'static str` and `&'world str`.

Because `&mut T` is invariant over `T`, the compiler concludes it can't apply any subtyping
to the first argument, and so `T` must be exactly `&'static str`.

> This is counter to the `&T` case:

Reviewer 9: there is no `&` here?

Maybe actually stay with `&'a str` instead of using some type parameter `T` here

Because `&mut T` is invariant over `T`, the compiler concludes it can't apply any subtyping
to the first argument, and so `T` must be exactly `&'static str`.

> This is counter to the `&T` case

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This is counter to the `&T` case:
```
